=======================================================================
https://www.are.na/blog/hyperland-intermedia-and-the-web-that-never-was
=======================================================================

Hyperland, Intermedia, and the Web That Never Was
-------------------------------------------------
In a rare early instance of mainframe computing being applied to the humanities,
students at Brown used FRESS to read poetry. They scrolled through and annotated
poems with “creative graffiti,” linking sections to one another wherever
thematic associations emerged. FRESS awakened the first online scholarly
community: in class discussions held within the system, shy students grew
garrulous, and the FRESS class produced three times more writing than a
computer-free control group,8 a volume significant enough for their professors
to wonder if perhaps they’d only made more work for themselves. Undoubtedly the
students felt empowered by FRESS’ most lasting contribution to modern computing:
the undo function.9

IRIS’ biggest project was the creation of a hypertext software system called
Intermedia, a next-level evolution of HES and FRESS designed to be a
fully-integrated “scholar’s workstation” for faculty and students alike. “The
vision of Intermedia,” explains Karen Catlin, one of Nicole’s colleagues, “was
that the professors would be using the same tool that they would be using to
teach the students.”11 This meant the system had to be robust enough to support
serious scholarship while still remaining user-friendly to undergraduates who
had never so much as touched a mouse.

Today, we tend to think of applications on our computers and phones as
single-use tools. I use Pages to compose documents, Photoshop to adjust images,
Safari to browse the Web, and Are.na to compile and organize research materials.
Intermedia proposed that all those activities could be connected. As its name
suggests, Intermedia was plural: it included InterText, a word processor,
InterDraw, a drawing tool, Interpix, for looking at scanned images, InterSpect,
a three-dimensional object viewer, and InterVal, a timeline editor. Together,
these five applications formed an information environment, a flexible housing
for whatever corpus of documents a scholar might want to consult.

I can add Web links to a Word document, for example, and my Mail program is
clever enough to identify names and addresses in the messages I receive, adding
them to my Contacts or my Calendar. As practical as these connections are,
they’re only fragments of what Intermedia made possible. Five years before the
arrival of the World Wide Web, Intermedia empowered its users to create
hyperlinks between their own documents. Viewed as a whole, these links formed an
Intermedia “Web.” Distinct from the Web as we know it today, an Intermedia Web
was a map of paths. Because information about the links made were stored in a
separate database from the documents themselves, the program could support
multiple perspectives on the same material. Rather than a single shared Web, a
collectively-authored, globally-distributed tangle of hypermedia, Intermedia had
as many Webs as it had users—each a bird’s eye view of every link traveled, and
where it led.

Tags
----
Technology, Early.Internet, IRIS, HES, FRESS, HTML, Networking, Hypertext,
Xanadu
